---
title: "What is the UK’s responsibility for climate action?"
author: "Jack Ainsworth"
publication: "The Degrowth System"
publication_slug: "thedegrowthsystem"
published_at: "2022-05-05T08:30:29.000Z"
source_url: "https://thedegrowthsystem.substack.com/p/what-is-the-uks-responsibility-for"
word_count: 1454
estimated_read_time: 8
---

The complexity of conversation surrounding who is responsible for various aspects of climate change risks paralysing debate on urgently needed climate policy. Without a broadly accepted agreement on the UK’s historical responsibility for global heating and climate change, and the policy proposals an agreement would produce, we risk delaying action through speaking past one another and potentially misdiagnosing our responsibilities if the currently dominant narrative is accepted. Discourse on responsibility in most press outlets, particularly tabloids, does not get surpass the assertion that ‘[Extinction Rebellion should go and protest in China,’](https://www.gbnews.uk/shows/michelle-dewberry-extinction-rebellion-should-go-to-china-who-produce-28-of-global-emissions/120448) an allusion to China’s current total annual emissions outpacing the UK [by 28:1](https://ourworldindata.org/co2-emissions). The climate justice and broader environmentalist movement in the UK would benefit from a greater literacy in the UK and Global North’s historical responsibility for climate change and what this is implies. Whilst research in this field is often dense and impenetrable, it is easily distilled into a clear and palatable argument. 

The logic of the dominant argument is clear. China currently emits 28 times more greenhouse gases than the UK, its emissions are rising and ours are declining, why should I and my compatriots give up prized aspects of our lifestyles when the impact of doing so is totally insignificant vis-à-vis China? The communication of this issue by reformist environmentalists, mass media and tory politicians is perniciously optimistic, it produces broad apathy in many, leaving people feeling overwhelmed and powerless both as an individual and as a collective to meaningfully contribute to global emissions reductions. The apathy produced serves the interests of reformist environmentalists and proponents of ‘green growth’ (“business-as-usual) as individuals are uncompelled to radically alter their behaviour, continuing to consume high quantities of resources as a result of this [paradigmatic collective action problem](https://www.e-education.psu.edu/geog30/node/342). This logic, however, does not hold up well to scrutiny when faced with challenges from ecological economics and the climate justice movement.  

In a climate activists’ toolkit, the most immediate rebuttal against the previously made argument regards considering emissions on both a *per capita* basis and *cumulatively* over time. The argument that Extinction Rebellion should go and protest in China holds less water when per capita CO2 emissions (tonnes) in 2019 were at a ratio of 1.4:1, [with China producing 7.1 tonnes/cap](https://www.iea.org/countries/china) as [opposed to UK producing 5.1](https://www.iea.org/countries/united-kingdom) (China:UK). Perhaps Extinction Rebellion should go and protest more in the USA, [who produced 14.4 tonnes/cap in 2019](https://www.iea.org/countries/united-states), or even Qatar who [produced 30.7 tonnes/cap](https://www.iea.org/countries/qatar). To better visualise this, a return flight from London to Bali emits 3.6 tonnes of CO2 per economy class passenger.

The per capita responsibility argument relies on an assumption about justice and individual responsibility for climate change. Climate justice advocates suggest, uncontroversially, that each individual living on earth is entitled to a “good life within planetary boundaries,” typically defined as a broad meeting of basic universalizable human needs (nutrition, access to energy, communication etc.) whilst not transgressing “fair and just” shares of certain biophysical resources such as emissions, material resources and land. This argument is not easily digested when the conventional unit of analysis when we talk about emissions and resource use is the nation-state, we always compare China to the UK, but this analysis isn’t very useful if differences in population size aren’t considered. If, therefore, we believe that each individual on Earth has equal moral value, a fair approach must start from the principle that the atmosphere is a shared and finite resource, that all people are entitled to an equal share of it, and that we must, therefore, think about emissions and resource use on a per capita basis. 

When considering the carbon in the atmosphere, the fertiliser in the ground and the precious metal in the scrapheaps, it's evident that not all of it has been put there this year. Therefore, it’s also essential to think of emissions and resource use on a *cumulative* basis. Yes, China emits the most right now, but if we assume that the total of all historical emissions causes global temperature rise, given that CO2 remains in the atmosphere for [several hundred years,](https://blogs.edf.org/climate411/2008/02/26/ghg_lifetimes/) this changes the scope of the discussion[1](#footnote-1). If we look directly at cumulative emissions, the Global North, who currently make up around 17% of global population (USA, Europe, Canada, Japan, South Korea, Australia, New Zealand) [are responsible for 68% of cumulative historical emissions,](https://ourworldindata.org/contributed-most-global-co2) with the [UK being responsible for 4.6%.](https://ourworldindata.org/co2/country/united-kingdom?country=GBR~ARG) For a country that only hosts 0.9% of the world’s population, emitting 4.6% of total emissions already seems unfair, and that’s before we consider that the total sum of all cumulative emissions is hugely excessive anyway, and producing climate and ecological breakdown.  

This reasoning is what started the conversation around “fair shares” of carbon emissions, [pioneered by](https://libgen.is/scimag/10.1016%2FS2542-5196%2820%2930196-0) researchers Jason Hickel, Julia Steinberger, Daniel O'Neill amongst many others. Underlying this argument is the assertion that we should consider a threshold of total emissions that fulfils two criteria. Firstly, that there is a certain budget of carbon emissions we may collectively produce that does not cause irreversible climate breakdown, this limit being the total emissions that would increase CO2 concentration from [pre-industrial levels of 278ppm](https://svs.gsfc.nasa.gov/4962) (parts per million) [to 350ppm](https://libgen.is/scimag/10.5751%2Fes-03180-140232). Secondly, that each country and individual is entitled to a portion of these emissions in order to lead a “good life” where their basic human needs are met.

This all becomes very tricky when we take a look at a graph of atmospheric CO2 concentrations and see that we flew past 350ppm in 1990, emitting around 830 gigatonnes (Gt) in total to get to that point, [sitting at around 420ppm today,](https://gml.noaa.gov/ccgg/trends/) having emitted around 1516 Gt in total. The researchers in question make one further assumption. If in the time since the industrial revolution the safe amount of emissions that balances both access to emissions for development *and* planetary boundaries, then any country that has used more than their fair share of that 830 Gt can said to have “overshot” their fair share. Researchers do a simple calculation to work a country’s “overshoot emissions” I.e., who’s eaten more than their fair share of pie, here we can do it for the UK.  

To work out the fair share one calculates national average population over time, divide that by global average population and times the total by 830. For the UK, our fair share comes to 13 Gt. As you can imagine, we’ve used a fair amount more than that, 79 Gt total to be precise. This effectively equates to if 1.3 people at a birthday party with 83 people ate 8 out of the 83 slices of available cake. The USA, being assigned a fair share of 41 Gt has used 420 Gt. 4 people have eaten over half of the cake meant for 83 people. These nations, amongst others including Russia, Japan and most of Europe can be said to be climate debtors, they owe emissions, all the data available [here](https://libgen.is/scimag/10.1016%2FS2542-5196%2820%2930196-0). The inverse becomes true for places like China and India. India being assigned 133 Gt has only used 43 of them, China was assigned 189 and has used 160. They can be said to be climate creditors, in the sense that they are owed emissions. 

Many objections will undoubtedly pop up in your head when reading this. Can a coal stoker on a Victorian steam train or 20th century oil barons really be held accountable for the excessive use of fossil fuels when they’d no idea using them was harmful? How do we give back emissions debt? If we’ve already collectively overshot, then is it not tough luck for India and the Global South? We’ve got a planet to save after all! 

The ethical questions are very tricky to navigate, this is one of the many examples of climate change being what Stephen Gardiner akin [to the “perfect moral storm”](https://libgen.is/scimag/10.1111%2F1478-9302.12000_17). The dispersion of cause and effects, the fragmentation of agency and institutional inadequacy Gardiner outlines makes any meaningful transition highly difficult to orchestrate. Yet from these calculations at least one thing should be obvious: we have had our fair share of fossil fuel usage in the UK. This overshoot has brought about far more wealth than is necessary to go around, and from an ethical perspective, we must downscale our fossil fuel consumption with haste, and not to be so hasty when we lambast India, China and the rest of the Global South as the boogeymen of climate change. 

*Cover illustration -* Vincent van Gogh, *Factories at Clichy,* 1887\. *Courtesy of the Saint Louis Art Museum and the Art Gallery of Ontario.*

[1](#footnote-anchor-1)

 I do not include methane and other greenhouse gases in this analysis as it is much more difficult to quantify the historical responsibility for methane emissions, as the methane cycle is much shorter than the carbon cycle.