---
title: "Ambitious People"
author: "Freddie deBoer"
publication: ""
publication_slug: "freddiedeboer"
published_at: "2025-11-03T16:51:47.000Z"
source_url: "https://freddiedeboer.substack.com/p/ambitious-people"
word_count: 2706
estimated_read_time: 14
---

Not that long ago, *New York*’s Emily Gould dedicated [her newsletter](https://nymag.substack.com/s/dinner-party) to listing the extraordinary accomplishments of past *n+1* interns. This strikes me as fundamentally strange business, but I can’t deny that from the standpoint of a certain kind of fretful left-leaning former National Honors Society member, the roster she assembles is impressive. (I have embedded that list in a footnote below.[1](#footnote-1)) The accomplishments listed are the kind that my readers enjoy theatrically disdaining, but the simple reality is that many many people would like to be successful in the way of that list, and that ultimately is the only real currency of success, the envy of other people. Sorry if that’s cynical, but I don’t make the rules. Take it up with Gore Vidal.

I have this endless back and forth with a particularly vocal portion of my readership - I describe some cultural and social conditions I see as important to the American elite, they write comments and emails scoffing at the idea that those things could ever be important. My stock response is that disdaining the things that elites care about does not make those things inconsequential; you are free to argue that Ivy League degrees tell us nothing of value about those who hold them, but as long as the people who hand out jobs and status care about those degrees, they are consequence-bearing, and so you shouldn’t ignore them. I also think, frankly, that these readers protest too much. They theatrically say things like “I can’t imagine living a life where this stuff matters!” because a part of themselves very much does think it matters, and they are uncomfortable with what that says about their own place in our complicated sociocultural sorting systems. (No one ever complained more about “hipsters,” in the hipster heyday of the mid-2000s, than those who lived very similar lives but felt themselves to be somehow apart from and above that culture.) You don’t have to concede to those feelings, though. I think you *do* have to concede to the fact that the American elite has outsized influence and power, and that the American elite is in a constant state of wrestling with its own self-definition and relationship to itself. I write about the *New York Times*, my readers complain that the *New York Times* doesn’t matter, and all I can say is… yes it does, including to you. If it didn’t, you wouldn’t bother to complain.

It’s perfectly fair to say that you don’t like it when I write about any particular thing I write about; that’s what getting paid for a newsletter entails, and I do take that stuff seriously. “The foibles of America’s overeducated elite annoy me, therefore I insist that they don’t matter” is just distorted and motivated reasoning.

The question that immediately strikes me, on reading that list of accomplishments, is what exactly we’re to do with the status that’s conferred by them, these days. How are we supposed to feel about being impressive, if we’re willing to rudely assume a particular kind of politics onto the members of that list? Surely the vast majority of them, being once associated with a Marxist journal - the Marxism is vestigial, but isn’t it always - have lefty views, which is to say, views distrustful of elites and status and the great sorting systems of American life. The tension here should be obvious: these denizens of the literary left are presumably critics of the process through which elites become elites, of the greasy ladder of capitalist success, and yet they are also clearly busy strivers who would never forego climbing themselves. That contradiction does nothing to invalidate a liberatory or egalitarian politics. (Sorry, *Daily Wire* readers.) But it makes you wonder what exactly your average *New York* magazine reader might be impressed by when they read that impressive list. What is really operative among upwardly-mobile 21st century educated liberals? Is it the listed accomplishments themselves, or the studied discomfort the accomplishers have towards them?

Modern socialish urbanite culture is filled with people who talk a lot about inequality and the fundamental injustice of systems of reward. I think this represents real progress, I really do. It may be hard to believe now, but not that long ago one couldn’t assume that a member of the educated upwardly-mobile class would be someone sympathetic to the problem of inequality. But to exist within modern lefty urbanite culture you have to have both the practical financial ability to live in ludicrously expensive enclaves and the cultural capital necessary to appear simultaneously deserving of attention and disdainful of wanting it. That is to say, Gould has bothered to share this list of accomplishments because she expects the kind of people who are subscribed to a *New York* magazine newsletter to immediately be impressed by the accomplishments. Personally I just always find it interesting, when we’re confronted with the conventional success of those whose politics are at least theoretically embedded with the crude-but-wise folk anti-capitalism of the 21st century. The system, the system is very bad… but my outcomes within it are very good. Who can say why.

Yes, once again I am offering my dog-eared observation that a disdain for meritocracy is a very handy tool among a particularly influential set of meritocrats. The *n+1* version of the meritocrat would not be wrong to see the business school-to-investment bank pipeline version of meritocracy as fundamentally more consequential than their own kind, to argue that the cultural ladder is shorter and ricketier than the financial one, and perhaps less likely to take you anywhere with air conditioning. But it remains a ladder all the same, and it still carries that familiar anxiety of social ascension - the sense that there is some ultimate door you’re trying to be waved through, even if no one seems able to describe what’s on the other side.

I guess what I’m asking is, what would the *n+1* editorial voice make of the tendency of *n+1* interns to so reliably ascend precisely the ladders of establishment success that such journals once existed to criticize? I grant you that *n+1*’s presence as a Marxist “Marxian” journal now feels a bit dated, like arched-top cabinet doors in someone’s tastefully muted Long Island City co-op kitchen. And of course you can go the whole Harvard Marxist route if you’d like, point out that the journal’s tweedy let’s-get-the-boys-together-on-the-quad-for-some-semi-ironic-rugby deal was always going to live in an endlessly self-refracting tension with a class-antagonistic political program. Blah blah blah. I get that my whole routine here is tiresome. But I do think it’s always worth asking: what does it mean to pursue the trappings of establishment success from within a politics that disdains the establishment? How do you pursue enviable laurels from within generational cohorts that have ironized every version of success without actually diminishing the need to achieve it? I imagine the people on the list were flattered to be there. But, I imagine, also embarrassed? Was Gould negging them? I think she may have been negging them.

I do feel duty bound to point out that, for many, simple financial considerations foreclose on the possibility of being an intern at a beloved literary journal famous for launching people into careers at more financially remunerative places. As always, the real aristocracy is defined by the ability to take on poorly paid jobs that eventually lead to slightly better paid jobs in industries that tend to attract people who define themselves by their distaste for money. The price of admission is the ability to pretend not to notice the cost.

This should not be interpreted as antipathy towards anyone on that list, much less everyone on that list. I admire Richard Beck’s first book, especially because it must have been so thankless to sell and write and promote; I like everything Molly Young does. I don’t have much in the way of caustic one-liners about the people listed there, although whenever Moira Donegan writes about the backlash to #MeToo I imagine her wearing a hotdog costume. And, to repeat my inevitable cliché, *This is Not Something They Have Done, This is Something That Has Been Done to Them.* I am always genuinely curious about what it feels like to live in a world where you are expected to build a life out of ambivalence. Gould herself comes from this peculiar little stratum, or near enough. Gould says that Doreen St. Felix has “won all the prizes.” Indeed she has! Indeed, indeed, indeed, she has. But do those prizes not come from precisely the corrupt and grubby meritocrat establishment most of these people disdain? They do.

Well. I can promise you that, if any of the people on that list have any money at all, most have it because their parents gave it to them. This is not a slight against any of them who don’t have rich parents, mind you, just a statement of the deepening financial precarity of people who work in this business, which (again sorry to be meta) my readers tend to dramatically underestimate. The success I’m talking about here decoupled from reliable financial security a long time ago, and perhaps the smartest thing is to declare that it therefore does not matter. Then again, people keep trying to get on this type of list. People keep taking those internships. People keep applying for the prizes. People keep reaching for that brass ring. Perhaps only out of muscle memory from days of high school striving past, perhaps out of a misguided belief that these laurels really will one day confer financial stability, perhaps simply because there’s nothing else to do. You may well say that they’re doing it because they care about the craft, the work itself, and I admire that, but that’s the whole thing about the work itself, right - it exists entirely separately from the awards. And I think maybe part of the problem for people who pursue these laurels is that they do not have the requisite level of self-possession to truly believe that the work ever really speaks for itself; they need the outside recognition for it to feel real. This is difficult for an artist in any era, but in an era of collapsing financial rewards, it’s fatal.

Perhaps this explains the tension between status and self-effacement in these cultures, which has become not just a feature but the defining grammar of cultural success in the lefty meritocracy. It’s not that you win the prize. It’s that you win it while expressing, in exquisitely modulated prose, how uncomfortable you are to have been chosen. To accept the laurel while suggesting it probably should not exist, at least not in its current form, though you will of course put it in your bio. This is a performance, but also, I think, a sincere and unresolved psychological predicament. And I do feel for them.

In a deep sense, the “literary scene” of my broad generation remains defined by a very Millennial folk radicalism that grew in response to the 2008 financial crisis and subsequent recession. Atossa Abrahamian (“journalist, author most recently of *The Hidden Globe: How Wealth Hacks the World*”) burst onto the immediate post-financial crisis scene as part of a cohort of photogenic recent college grads who were able to make the call for socialism in a passionate and pragmatic way thanks to their own class insulation, which they all disavowed, but from which they also derived the safety to speak. And this was always the unresolvable tension at the heart of the thing: those who could afford to say capitalism wasn’t working were, by and large, the ones for whom it had always worked.

The people on Gould’s list and those who envy them are ones who have dedicated their lives, more or less explicitly, to the murmuring overanalysis of everything, and there is something deeply admirable in that. There is also something miserable in it. That you will quickly say that I am among their number does not render my observation untrue. And, as is always my arrogant conceit, from within this life my affective distance from all of this feels very real; that the people in my industry have effectively walled me off from most of these types of success helps me to maintain that belief, whether or not that belief is a delusion. If nothing else, this is true: I authentically hate ambition. I always have. I find it sweaty and vulgar. I hate the way that ambition chokes the air in rooms filled with people who would otherwise prefer to be casual and ironic, the way it infects ambitious essays by ambitious essayists with plodding middlebrow over-explanation and adds an acrid little tang to every piece of media insider gossip and every “excited to share the news….” But the truth is that the people who hate ambition most are those who are compelled to chase it. That’s the trick, that’s the joke. And maybe that’s what Gould was trying to say, in her own way - that in an industry where prestige is collapsing at about the same pace as financial reward, the question is not whether meritocratic ambition is good or bad, but whether there is enough consequence left for the distinction to make any difference.

[1](#footnote-anchor-1)

-   **Nikil Saval** – was only an intern for one day. Wrote a great book about how [open-plan offices are bad](https://link.nymag.com/click/40251843.25205/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cucGVuZ3VpbnJhbmRvbWhvdXNlLmNvbS9ib29rcy8yMjA2OTAvY3ViZWQtYnktbmlraWwtc2F2YWwvP3VlaWQ9MTM3MmNiZjI0OWI2OGZjNTZlY2FhYWM2OWNkY2M3Njc/59ccff6fbcb59c747f8b45aeB94e56841), then went on to become a [Pennsylvania state senator](https://link.nymag.com/click/40251843.25205/aHR0cHM6Ly9wYXNlbmF0b3JzYXZhbC5jb20vYWJvdXQvP3VlaWQ9MTM3MmNiZjI0OWI2OGZjNTZlY2FhYWM2OWNkY2M3Njc/59ccff6fbcb59c747f8b45aeB6a58db53).
    
-   **Amanda Cassatt (née Gutterman)** – [got into crypto early](https://link.nymag.com/click/40251843.25205/aHR0cHM6Ly9lbi53aWtpcGVkaWEub3JnL3dpa2kvQW1hbmRhX0Nhc3NhdHQ_dWVpZD0xMzcyY2JmMjQ5YjY4ZmM1NmVjYWFhYzY5Y2RjYzc2Nw/59ccff6fbcb59c747f8b45aeBba42d7af) and is probably the richest person on this list.
    
-   **Moira Donegan** – *Guardian* columnist. Started the [“Shitty Media Men” list](https://linkst.thecut.com/click/40251843.25205/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cudGhlY3V0LmNvbS8yMDE4LzAxL21vaXJhLWRvbmVnYW4taS1zdGFydGVkLXRoZS1tZWRpYS1tZW4tbGlzdC5odG1sP3VlaWQ9MTM3MmNiZjI0OWI2OGZjNTZlY2FhYWM2OWNkY2M3Njc/59ccff6fbcb59c747f8b45aeB598eeb5f). Her first book, *Gone Too Far: Me Too, Backlash, and the Future of Feminist Politics*, is forthcoming from Scribner.
    
-   **Leon Neyfakh** – rose from *Observer* reporter (during the fabled Peter Kaplan era) to become a podcast phenom. Co-creator of *[Slow Burn](https://link.nymag.com/click/40251843.25205/aHR0cHM6Ly9wb2RjYXN0cy5hcHBsZS5jb20vdXMvcG9kY2FzdC9zbG93LWJ1cm4vaWQxMzE1MDQwMTMwP3VlaWQ9MTM3MmNiZjI0OWI2OGZjNTZlY2FhYWM2OWNkY2M3Njc/59ccff6fbcb59c747f8b45aeBeb57ad84)*, host of *[Fiasco](https://link.nymag.com/click/40251843.25205/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cucHVzaGtpbi5mbS9wb2RjYXN0cy9maWFzY28_dWVpZD0xMzcyY2JmMjQ5YjY4ZmM1NmVjYWFhYzY5Y2RjYzc2Nw/59ccff6fbcb59c747f8b45aeBba629420)*, and co-founder of [Prologue Projects](https://link.nymag.com/click/40251843.25205/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cucHJvbG9ndWVwcm9qZWN0cy5jb20vP3VlaWQ9MTM3MmNiZjI0OWI2OGZjNTZlY2FhYWM2OWNkY2M3Njc/59ccff6fbcb59c747f8b45aeB2df431ea). Has made more money than most of these people, if that’s how we’re defining “power.”
    
-   **Annie Wyman** – co-creator of the [Netflix show](https://link.nymag.com/click/40251843.25205/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cubmV0ZmxpeC5jb20vdGl0bGUvODEyMDYyNTk_dWVpZD0xMzcyY2JmMjQ5YjY4ZmM1NmVjYWFhYzY5Y2RjYzc2Nw/59ccff6fbcb59c747f8b45aeB75b489ce) *[The Chair](https://link.nymag.com/click/40251843.25205/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cubmV0ZmxpeC5jb20vdGl0bGUvODEyMDYyNTk_dWVpZD0xMzcyY2JmMjQ5YjY4ZmM1NmVjYWFhYzY5Y2RjYzc2Nw/59ccff6fbcb59c747f8b45aeB75b489ce)* starring Sandra Oh. TV trumps all other forms of media represented here, hence the high ranking.
    
-   **David Noriega** – [correspondent at NBC News](https://link.nymag.com/click/40251843.25205/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cubmJjbmV3cy5jb20vYXV0aG9yL2RhdmlkLW5vcmllZ2EtbmNwbjEzMDc0MDk_dWVpZD0xMzcyY2JmMjQ5YjY4ZmM1NmVjYWFhYzY5Y2RjYzc2Nw/59ccff6fbcb59c747f8b45aeB92e498a7); see above
    
-   **“Magic” Molly Young** – Had one of the [best Tumblrs of all time](https://link.nymag.com/click/40251843.25205/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cudHVtYmxyLmNvbS9tb2xseXlvdW5nP3VlaWQ9MTM3MmNiZjI0OWI2OGZjNTZlY2FhYWM2OWNkY2M3Njc/59ccff6fbcb59c747f8b45aeB6895bfd4), which then turned into the [brilliant book newsletter](https://link.nymag.com/click/40251843.25205/aHR0cDovL3d3dy5tb2xseS15b3VuZy5jb20vbmV3c2xldHRlci5odG1sP3VlaWQ9MTM3MmNiZjI0OWI2OGZjNTZlY2FhYWM2OWNkY2M3Njc/59ccff6fbcb59c747f8b45aeBd5f0d9a7) *[Read Like the Wind](https://link.nymag.com/click/40251843.25205/aHR0cDovL3d3dy5tb2xseS15b3VuZy5jb20vbmV3c2xldHRlci5odG1sP3VlaWQ9MTM3MmNiZjI0OWI2OGZjNTZlY2FhYWM2OWNkY2M3Njc/59ccff6fbcb59c747f8b45aeBd5f0d9a7).* Recently freed of her book-reviewing duties, she is available to write understated and witty magazine profiles galore. Assigning editors, snap her up before *The Atlantic* locks her down with a offer she can’t refuse.
    
-   **Doreen St. Félix** – *The* *New Yorker*’s “Critic’s Notebook” columnist, has won all the prizes, was on a *Forbes* “30 Under 30” media list.
    
-   **Alice Gregory** – *The New Yorker* writer. Greatest hits include this [Claire Denis profile](https://link.nymag.com/click/40251843.25205/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cubmV3eW9ya2VyLmNvbS9tYWdhemluZS8yMDE4LzA1LzI4L3RoZS1mZWFybGVzcy1jaW5lbWEtb2YtY2xhaXJlLWRlbmlzP3VlaWQ9MTM3MmNiZjI0OWI2OGZjNTZlY2FhYWM2OWNkY2M3Njc/59ccff6fbcb59c747f8b45aeBaf4461eb) and this story about [people who accidentally commit vehicular manslaughter](https://link.nymag.com/click/40251843.25205/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cubmV3eW9ya2VyLmNvbS9tYWdhemluZS8yMDE3LzA5LzE4L3RoZS1zb3Jyb3ctYW5kLXRoZS1zaGFtZS1vZi10aGUtYWNjaWRlbnRhbC1raWxsZXI_dWVpZD0xMzcyY2JmMjQ5YjY4ZmM1NmVjYWFhYzY5Y2RjYzc2Nw/59ccff6fbcb59c747f8b45aeB28283d45), a masterpiece of the form.
    
-   **Molly Fischer** – formerly of *New York*, now at *The* *New Yorker*, where she wrote most recently about [divorce books](https://link.nymag.com/click/40251843.25205/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cubmV3eW9ya2VyLmNvbS9tYWdhemluZS8yMDI1LzAzLzMxL25vLWZhdWx0LWhhbGV5LW1sb3Rlay1ib29rLXJldmlldz91ZWlkPTEzNzJjYmYyNDliNjhmYzU2ZWNhYWFjNjljZGNjNzY3/59ccff6fbcb59c747f8b45aeB8d00e92c) and [Keith McNally’s memoir](https://link.nymag.com/click/40251843.25205/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cubmV3eW9ya2VyLmNvbS9tYWdhemluZS8yMDI1LzA1LzEyL2tlaXRoLW1jbmFsbHlzLWd1aWRlLXRvLW1ha2luZy1hLXNjZW5lP3VlaWQ9MTM3MmNiZjI0OWI2OGZjNTZlY2FhYWM2OWNkY2M3Njc/59ccff6fbcb59c747f8b45aeBd00b8f2b). While at *New York*, she profiled [Sarah Schulman](https://linkst.thecut.com/click/40251843.25205/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cudGhlY3V0LmNvbS8yMDIwLzA4L3NhcmFoLXNjaHVsbWFuLWNvbmZsaWN0LWlzLW5vdC1hYnVzZS5odG1sP3VlaWQ9MTM3MmNiZjI0OWI2OGZjNTZlY2FhYWM2OWNkY2M3Njc/59ccff6fbcb59c747f8b45aeB2cb029e1) and [Adam Tooze](https://link.nymag.com/click/40251843.25205/aHR0cHM6Ly9ueW1hZy5jb20vaW50ZWxsaWdlbmNlci9hcnRpY2xlL2FkYW0tdG9vemUtcHJvZmlsZS5odG1sP3VlaWQ9MTM3MmNiZjI0OWI2OGZjNTZlY2FhYWM2OWNkY2M3Njc/59ccff6fbcb59c747f8b45aeBc5203aec), among many others.
    
-   **Kaitlin Phillips** – “Cool girl,” edgelord-y publicist with a [popular Substack](https://link.nymag.com/click/40251843.25205/aHR0cHM6Ly9naWZ0Z3VpZGUuc3Vic3RhY2suY29tLz91ZWlkPTEzNzJjYmYyNDliNjhmYzU2ZWNhYWFjNjljZGNjNzY3/59ccff6fbcb59c747f8b45aeB97096cae). You do, in fact, gotta hand it to her. Inventor of *n+1* personals.
    
-   **Greg Jackson** – author of *[Prodigals](https://link.nymag.com/click/40251843.25205/aHR0cHM6Ly91cy5tYWNtaWxsYW4uY29tL2Jvb2tzLzk3ODEyNTAxMTgwNTkvcHJvZGlnYWxzLz91ZWlkPTEzNzJjYmYyNDliNjhmYzU2ZWNhYWFjNjljZGNjNzY3/59ccff6fbcb59c747f8b45aeB6647e933)* and *[The Dimensions of a Cave](https://link.nymag.com/click/40251843.25205/aHR0cHM6Ly91cy5tYWNtaWxsYW4uY29tL2Jvb2tzLzk3ODAzNzQyOTg0OTQvdGhlZGltZW5zaW9uc29mYWNhdmUvP3VlaWQ9MTM3MmNiZjI0OWI2OGZjNTZlY2FhYWM2OWNkY2M3Njc/59ccff6fbcb59c747f8b45aeB7f624ee3)*. Dated Parker Posey.
    
-   **Dayna Tortorici** – *n+1* editor, brilliant writer for all the publications; her first novel is forthcoming.
    
-   **Atossa Abrahamian** – journalist, author most recently of *[The Hidden Globe: How Wealth Hacks the World](https://link.nymag.com/click/40251843.25205/aHR0cHM6Ly9ib29rc2hvcC5vcmcvcC9ib29rcy90aGUtaGlkZGVuLWdsb2JlLWhvdy13ZWFsdGgtaGFja3MtdGhlLXdvcmxkLWF0b3NzYS1hcmF4aWEtYWJyYWhhbWlhbi8yMTA4NTI0OT9lYW49OTc4MDU5MzMyOTg1NiZ1ZWlkPTEzNzJjYmYyNDliNjhmYzU2ZWNhYWFjNjljZGNjNzY3/59ccff6fbcb59c747f8b45aeB15219e77).*
    
-   **Jordan Sjol** – co-wrote the movie *How to Blow Up a Pipeline.*
    
-   **Namara Smith** – Books editor at *The New Yorker*.
    
-   **Becca Rothfeld** – Washington *Post* nonfiction book critic. Author of the essay collection *[All Things Are Too Small](https://link.nymag.com/click/40251843.25205/aHR0cHM6Ly91cy5tYWNtaWxsYW4uY29tL2Jvb2tzLzk3ODEyNTA4NDk5MTUvYWxsdGhpbmdzYXJldG9vc21hbGwvP3VlaWQ9MTM3MmNiZjI0OWI2OGZjNTZlY2FhYWM2OWNkY2M3Njc/59ccff6fbcb59c747f8b45aeBaecfd503)*.
    
-   **Carla Blumenkranz** - *The New Yorker* senior editor.
    
-   **Kat Stoeffel** – *GQ* features director.
    
-   **Marc Tracy** – culture reporter at the New York *Times.*
    
-   **Thomas Chatterton Williams** – author, contrarian; led the effort to write “[The](https://link.nymag.com/click/40251843.25205/aHR0cHM6Ly9lbi53aWtpcGVkaWEub3JnL3dpa2kvQV9MZXR0ZXJfb25fSnVzdGljZV9hbmRfT3Blbl9EZWJhdGU_dWVpZD0xMzcyY2JmMjQ5YjY4ZmM1NmVjYWFhYzY5Y2RjYzc2Nw/59ccff6fbcb59c747f8b45aeB308bdbd2) *[Harper’s](https://link.nymag.com/click/40251843.25205/aHR0cHM6Ly9lbi53aWtpcGVkaWEub3JnL3dpa2kvQV9MZXR0ZXJfb25fSnVzdGljZV9hbmRfT3Blbl9EZWJhdGU_dWVpZD0xMzcyY2JmMjQ5YjY4ZmM1NmVjYWFhYzY5Y2RjYzc2Nw/59ccff6fbcb59c747f8b45aeB308bdbd2)* [Letter](https://link.nymag.com/click/40251843.25205/aHR0cHM6Ly9lbi53aWtpcGVkaWEub3JnL3dpa2kvQV9MZXR0ZXJfb25fSnVzdGljZV9hbmRfT3Blbl9EZWJhdGU_dWVpZD0xMzcyY2JmMjQ5YjY4ZmM1NmVjYWFhYzY5Y2RjYzc2Nw/59ccff6fbcb59c747f8b45aeB308bdbd2).”
    
-   **Sam MacLaughlin** – heads up the [Williamsburg McNally Jackson location](https://link.nymag.com/click/40251843.25205/aHR0cHM6Ly9ia2x5bmVyLmNvbS9tY25hbGx5LWphY2tzb24tYmVsb3ZlZC1pbmRlcGVuZGVudC1ib29rc3RvcmUtb3BlbnMtd2lsbGlhbXNidXJnLW91dHBvc3QvP3VlaWQ9MTM3MmNiZjI0OWI2OGZjNTZlY2FhYWM2OWNkY2M3Njc/59ccff6fbcb59c747f8b45aeBbfee7167).
    
-   **Richard Beck** - author most recently of *[Homeland: The War on Terror in American Life](https://link.nymag.com/click/40251843.25205/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cucGVuZ3VpbnJhbmRvbWhvdXNlLmNvbS9ib29rcy82NzczOTMvaG9tZWxhbmQtYnktcmljaGFyZC1iZWNrLz91ZWlkPTEzNzJjYmYyNDliNjhmYzU2ZWNhYWFjNjljZGNjNzY3/59ccff6fbcb59c747f8b45aeB08cd2330)* [](https://link.nymag.com/click/40251843.25205/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cucGVuZ3VpbnJhbmRvbWhvdXNlLmNvbS9ib29rcy82NzczOTMvaG9tZWxhbmQtYnktcmljaGFyZC1iZWNrLz91ZWlkPTEzNzJjYmYyNDliNjhmYzU2ZWNhYWFjNjljZGNjNzY3/59ccff6fbcb59c747f8b45aeB08cd2330).
    
-   **Elias Rodrigues** – tenure-track professor at Sarah Lawrence, author of *[All the Water I’ve Seen Is Running](https://link.nymag.com/click/40251843.25205/aHR0cHM6Ly93d25vcnRvbi5jb20vYm9va3MvOTc4MDM5MzU0MDc5Nj91ZWlkPTEzNzJjYmYyNDliNjhmYzU2ZWNhYWFjNjljZGNjNzY3/59ccff6fbcb59c747f8b45aeB96d461a5)*.
    
-   **Arielle Isack** – editor at *The Baffler*.
    
-   **Andrew Jacobs** - wisely went to law school, unwisely found his way back into publishing, and is now associate general counsel at Macmillan.