---
title: "Cleaning Up Our Capitol Mess"
author: "Richard Y. Chappell"
publication: "Good Thoughts"
publication_slug: "goodthoughts"
published_at: "2021-01-11T19:17:00.000Z"
source_url: "https://goodthoughts.substack.com/p/cleaning-up-our-capitol-mess-21-01-11"
word_count: 1458
estimated_read_time: 8
---

Well it's been a little bit since I shared any of my thoughts on the recent political and social developments of the day so why not go ahead and let it all out now. One of the main reasons I am so glad to be off social media these days is because I don't think my sanity would have remained had I been reading all of the conspiracy theories surrounding the election, the Covid, and the Capitol riots that have transpired over the last two months. However, one of the things I do miss is seeing all the handwringing concerning the end of the Republic by all sorts of people who would have sworn on their mother's graves that Trump was going to win the election, and even when the results didn't turn out like they wanted were still convinced that the "Kraken" was about to be released upon the American people and justice for all was merely a Sidney Powell press conference away.

Call me jaded but I never bought the hype for one second. Yes, I know all about the irregularities, the Biden only ballots, the infinitesimally small number of mail-in ballots thrown out compared to the averages, and all the rest of it; but I never believed it was enough to overturn any state wide elections, and certainly not by Rudy Giuliani. You can conjecture all you want in the media, but when it comes to a courtroom you better have the goods or your case is trash. Time after time when given the opportunity to show the goods they never did. Without sufficient evidence you cannot prove a crime or fraud actually happened. That's the fault of Trump's election legal team, not the state courts, the supreme courts, or congress.

Yet, none of the facts have slowed people down from expressing one conspiracy theory after another about all of these matters. And just to be clear, Christians that go along with conspiracy theories are living in violation of Scripture. In an earlier post I wrote about not living by lies, as the essay (https://www.orthodoxytoday.org/articles/SolhenitsynLies.php) from Alexander Solzhenitsyn promotes. I continue to think that this principle is being greatly ignored by a huge percentage of believers, and it is being ignored to our shame and detriment. It is one thing for our Faith to be shunned, ignored, ridiculed, or mocked by the media and social elite. It is another to promote QAnon or any other right-wing leaning conspiracy theories that destroy our credibility as people who live by and promote the truth. Yes, we have a right to be concerned about our country and it's destruction, but NOT at the price of promoting truth and living with integrity.

The Apostle Peter makes clear that no Christian should suffer as a "murderer, or thief, or evildoer, or a ***troublesome meddler,***" because for any confessing Christian to suffer under these accusations would not be considered suffering at all, but rather justified shame because of their violations of the law of God and man. Peter goes on to state that if anyone suffers for being a Christian however, there is no shame at all in that situation because you are suffering for the name and glory of God.

That is why Christians can never become slaves to politicians or political parties, because all that ensues is acquiescing to cults of personalities or worse. That is why so many people have denied reality for the sake of Trump, because they actually believed that a narcissistic, self-promoter would save the Republic. Not to take away many of the good things that President Trump did accomplish in his four years, and not to ignore the support that he gained for his better governing over and above his rhetoric, however, when push came to shove it was always about Trump outdoing Obama, the media, and the rest of his perceived antagonist way more than it was about him improving America. This is why he had little to no problem with the demonstrations at the Capitol until it truly did get out of hand and ended up reflecting poorly on him universally speaking. No, his words alone aren't grounds for giving him the full blame for the loss of life, the breaking down of societal norms, or the appearance of a failing government that the pictures demonstrated; but he certainly did not quell the situation when given the opportunity and in that he bares responsibility.

Of course, I would also argue that the entire events of the year have been culminating in the moments we have seen recently. From being gaslighted by the media and told that riots were actually "mostly peaceful protest", to democrats ignoring the looting and burning of businesses, to calls for further insurrection by those considered marginalized by the right according to the "Woke", to conspiracy theories about EVERYTHING UNDER THE SUN and probably even the SUN ITSELF, I don't see how anyone can be shocked by anything that happens from here on out. Rumors of martial law being declared, cession by the liberals or the conservative states, or the Republic being altogether lost at the hands of the geriatric incoming President and his Democrat controlled congress... all of it begins to blend together like a rotten smoothie, and I'm not having any of it.

Can we just calm down the rhetoric a bit and breath for a second? I actually don't think things are as bad as everyone wants to convince you they are. As a matter of fact prior to this year and the Covid outbreak (thanks China), things around the world were getting remarkably better. From poverty, to food and water availability, to education, and infectious disease control everything was on a momentous upward improvement. And even with Covid sidetracking much of that, because of all the good things in place most believe that a quick recovery is inevitable in much of the world once Covid runs its course or the vaccine is rightly administered.

This is why I think much of the trouble that is promoted today is artificial. It's just another ploy by people who live and work in the anger business. Media, politicians, and strategist think that they are only necessary if a crisis is at hand. They peddle their wares on fear and anxiety. They need you to be worked up and aggravated about an issue for you to react the way they want. That is why you and I can no longer live this way. WE CANNOT LIVE BY FEAR just like we cannot live by lies. Fear is an enemy. It is a master that demands full submission. Even just a little fear will drive you to alter your life and your beliefs to the point that you begin to make all of your decisions and choices in life according to the fear you feel. Do not live this way! Fight fear! Fight it with reality and truth. Fight it with common sense and observation of the facts. Fight it with a Christian worldview armed to take down principalities and powers, rulers of darkness, and spiritual hosts of wickedness. Fight fear with light by shining the spotlight of truth on everything you read, hear, watch, and speak. Fight fear with love! Love of God and love of neighbor fights fear ferociously because it refuses to see people as enemies, objects of wrath, or non-image bearers of God. Fight fear with kindness. Heap coals of kindness on those who would want to bring you down or lure you with lies designed for you to be caught in the trappings of fear. Fight fear for your family's sake and for all of your loved ones. Don't let them see you be taken in by fear so that they will have strength to fight the good fight when it comes to their door.  

When we as a people can live according to the truth and reject the fearmongering of those seeking power over us, we will be united once again. We may not all agree, but at least we will assume the best and not the worst of one another. We can at least have open dialogue and work out our differences responsibly. We won't fear free speech, religion, or any of our other enumerated rights because we will graciously allow for the free exchange of ideas knowing that it is only true speech that can drive away lies and fear. People do need a voice today, but that voice must be one willing to be submissive to truth and reality. Cancelling speech, people, or politicians will not bring about unity or peace, it will only insight more fear and false narratives. We must live by truth and fight against fear. It's the only way peace and prosperity can continue.