---
title: "What is a Worldview?"
author: "Richard Y. Chappell"
publication: "Good Thoughts"
publication_slug: "goodthoughts"
published_at: "2021-08-27T15:26:44.000Z"
source_url: "https://goodthoughts.substack.com/p/what-is-a-worldview"
word_count: 1522
estimated_read_time: 8
---

Dr. Ronald Nash defines a worldview as “a set of beliefs about the most important issues in life.” He also states that a worldview must have a “conceptual scheme,” whereby a truly consistent worldview has a system of beliefs that hold the worldview together so that issues can be consistently processed and prioritized accordingly. Nash uses the example of how the right prescription eyeglasses allows their wearer to be able to see things clearly, but the wrong prescription will in no way help the wearer despite the fact that both are eyeglasses. In other words, only a faithful, consistent worldview, rooted in truth and wisdom, will be able to help people see the events of the day and the issues of life in the right light that is based in reality.

This is why the Christian Worldview is superior in every way to all other worldviews, and truly why it is the only way in which reality can be rightly understood. Yes, elements of other worldviews (worldviews can range from other religions to philosophical to simply emotional) can posses elements of truth when considering or looking at certain issues, but where they do recognize truth they are borrowing from a Christian worldview in order to see that truth, and simultaneously they are violating the consistency in their own worldview because reality cannot be ignored. For instance, when the atheist makes claims about an issue being either morally right or morally wrong, they are using a Christian worldview to make such claims, because in a consistent atheistic worldview such claims on morality cannot be made. Without a belief in God who established a moral order in keeping with His Holy character, morality simply becomes a construct of the people and whatever the people decide in the moment to be moral is what is seen as moral. Therefore, morality is always shifting and the standards of society are always in flux, because there is no standard of truth.

To understand how all these different worldviews came about, and why so many people hate the Biblical Worldview (I will use “Christian” and “Biblical” interchangeably because the two terms should be synonymous), all one has to do is go to the beginning when Adam and Eve disobeyed God in the Garden of Eden and took of the fruit from the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil and plunged themselves and their descendants into sin and death. This action did not just kill the souls of Adam and Eve and their children, but it also darkened their minds, their perceptions, and their motives. So often well meaning Christians think that the problem of sin is simply a heart problem, and we just need to get our hearts fixed and everything will be fine. The totality of the problem of sin affects way more than just the fallen condition of our hearts. The problem of sin affects every single part of life and even how we understand it. This is why the Apostle Paul tells believers that part of their submission to God involves submitting their whole bodies, including their minds (Romans 12:1-2), so that they can be transformed and renewed by God to rightly discern what is good, right, and true.

To think rightly about the world and everything in it, is truly a grace gift from God that should not be overlooked or ignored by the believer. Instead, our ability to think rightly should be appreciated as we thank God for the ability to see clearly what is right before our face, it must be disciplined in keeping with Holy Scriptures, and it must submit to the conforming of the Holy Spirit to help us to continue to grow in and by the revealed Truth of God. As believers, we have come to Christ as Savior and Lord because we know we cannot save ourselves. A significant part of our inability lies in the deficiencies of our minds to think itself out of this great dilemma, as well as the inability of our emotions to fully align with who God Is and what He demands of His people. This is what makes saving grace so significant as we live in this world, because God works in us to not only change our hearts, the seat of our feelings and emotions, but also our minds, the seat of our thoughts and understanding, so that everything can be brought into total submission to God. The very thing our first parents rejected when they, in their folly and sin, chose to disobey God and figure out life on their own.

While the ability to understand and process reality is a grace gift from God granted to the believer at conversion, the growth and development of this gift requires discipline and patience in the life of the believer to see it mature and become an important tool in the tool box of their Christian life. Without a doubt every believer should be working to develop this gift, as we are to work to develop all grace gifts that God gives us, but we also understand that some will be more gifted in this particular area than others. Yet, all believers must be willing to give time to the study of Holy Scriptures in every way to work to develop their worldview in a faithfully Biblical way. This is why all Christians should be willing to study Theology, Philosophy, Ethics, Apologetics, and Church History. This is why it is important that Christians read classic literature, even secular literature, to help them see how other people thought through events from differing points of view, while also processing all of these things through a Christian worldview.

Ultimately, if Christians fail to grasp the importance of developing a Biblical Worldview, our lack of discernment will disable us from answering the biggest questions in life with certainty and credibility. This is disastrous because the Christian faith is the only way to rightly process, understand, and give a response to the problems that plague all of humanity. From problems of poverty, justice, and equality to the problems of governments, nations, and war. Christianity has the answers to all of the problems, because it is a comprehensive worldview designed by God to deal with “all of life and godliness.” (2 Peter 1:3)

This does not mean that all the answers are explicit in scripture, but without fail there are principles and practices that are taught in the pages of the Bible that will help us get through even the worst of times. Let us be cautious, however, to not simply turn the Bible into some great answer book, the Bible is God’s revelation of Himself to His people. It’s greatest story and purpose is revealing God’s great plan of redemption, and in that story it tells the people of God how to live in light of what’s been given to them in Christ by the Holy Spirit as they continue in the wilderness of this fallen world until we cross into the Promised Land. Do not use the Bible as some sort of secret decoder toy, interpreting the headlines of the day for some secret knowledge only known to you. God is light and He is making all things clear and putting all things under His feet. The Christian worldview serves to make Truth known not to fall into conspiracy theories, so be cautious to avoid those pitfalls.

Let me close this first letter with the words of Paul in 2 Timothy 2, “Do your best to present yourself to God as one approved, a worker who has no need to be ashamed, rightly handling the word of truth. But avoid irreverent babble, for it will lead people into more and more ungodliness.” (2:15-16) The world does not need more bad ideas or philosophies it has enough of those. The world needs Truth! May we be people speaking, sharing, and seeking Truth all day every day. Study the word so that you will be able to recognize the folly and sin that surrounds us in the world, but also study so that you can see the Good, the Beautiful, and the True in this God created world. Focusing only on the bad will make you cynical and suspicious. Do not give into that temptation. Instead, see the folly of sin, call it out, and teach why the Bible has a better plan and a better path for others to follow. Hold leaders to the standard that the word of God says they will be held to. Do not settle for those who do not value what God’s word says we must value as believers. Keep your eyes on Christ and do not let the waves at your feet convince you that you will sink. God’s Truth is a firm foundation that will stand the test of time and it will be the only Truth that endures till the end.

Thank you for subscribing and thank you for reading. Until next week, may God bless you, bless our elected officials, bless our service men and women, bless our nation, bless the world, and bless His Church.